# Project context

In the original BioM3 work, the authors used a combination of SwissProt (UniProtKB), Pfam, and Supplemental data sources to compile training and finetuning datasets, so that in the training data there were "SwissProt entries" and "Pfam entries" as well as "Supplemental entries."

SwissProt entry fields: 
"PROTEIN NAME", "FUNCTION", "CATALYTIC ACTIVITY", "SUBUNIT", "DOMAIN", "LINEAGE", "FAMILY NAMES", "ACTIVITY REGULATION", "BIOPHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES", "SUBCELLULAR LOCATION", "SIMILARITY", "PTM", "TISSUE SPECIFICITY", "MISCELLANEOUS", "COFACTOR", "PATHWAY", "BIOTECHNOLOGY", "DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE"

Pfam provide fields:
"PROTEIN NAME", "FUNCTION", "CATALYTIC ACTIVITY", "SUBUNIT", "DOMAIN", "LINEAGE", "FAMILY NAMES", "ACTIVITY REGULATION", "BIOPHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES", "SUBCELLULAR LOCATION", "SIMILARITY", "PTM", "TISSUE SPECIFICITY", "MISCELLANEOUS", "COFACTOR", "PATHWAY", "BIOTECHNOLOGY", "INDUCTION", *"FAMILY DESCRIPTION"*, *"GENE ONTOLOGY"* 
(Emphasis indicates uniquely retrieved from Pfam.)

The pretraining data for BioM3 consisted of roughly 500K SwissProt entries and 44M Pfam entries. For finetuning, specific Pfam IDs were used to create smaller, family-focused datasets, subsetting these sources and adding in supplemental entries when available. For example, the *Legacy SH3 finetuning dataset* (`databases/misc/FINAL_SH3_all_dataset_with_prompts.csv`) has 599 SwissProt entries, 16,566 Pfam entries, and 7,865 Supplemental entries. These are ordered in 3 consecutive chunks: Supplemental, SwissProt, Pfam. For convenience, and to reduce errors, we also have the individual chunks as subsets (`databases/misc/FINAL_SH3_<source>.csv`).

The SH3 Legacy dataset csv contains a "protein_sequence" and "[final]text_caption" column. These are critical and associate a protein sequence-text pair. The caption is a curated string, composed from individual and indepedendly parsed fields from the databases. Importantly, there is some crossover in caption composition. For example, SwissProt entries contain an added "FAMILY NAMES" field that is found by identifying associated pfam IDs through the UniProtKB cross references field, and taking the corresponding pfam family name. As another example, Pfam entries contain UniProtKB (i.e. SwissProt) information found by association of a pfam accession to a UniProt entry. Note that there are two additional columns, "primary_Accession" and "pfam_label". The accession information is not to be used as a stricy identifier of each entry, as there are empty and duplicate values. Pfam labels are stored in a heterogeneous format, sometimes listed, sometimes a single string. 

In this project, we are working to produce an improved version of these datasets, in a more flexible format. The goal is to enable parsing of the SwissProt, Pfam, and other biological databases into a standard format (e.g. JSON or JSONL), which we can then further curate using "builders." Each builder that we define would consume one or more parsed database artifacts, and return a JSONL format list of data. Importantly, we cannot aim or hope for perfect replication of the Legacy format, for two main reasons: 1. We are working with more recent versions of the underlying databases (UniProt and Pfam) and there has been drift in sequence associations and annotations at that level. 2. There were some errors in the original data construction that we do not want to reproduce (e.g. "OMAIN" instead of "DOMAIN").

Other concerns to take note of: 
- The Legacy SH3 dataset included only the Sh3 domain name in DOMAIN NAMES, even when sequences had multiple domain annotations. Part of our goal in generalizing at this level is to enable flexible as to whether we want to include one or more domains in such a case during model training. By including all domains in a list format, we can filter later on.
- Legacy captions followed a consistent order. We want to enable escaping this ordering by enabling annotation randomization and also dropout. Again, motivating our dictionary-based approach.

In initial goal was to enable reproduction of the Legacy SH3 data as a proof of concept, which we have already completed for SwissProt. There is a Builder that consumes parsed SwissProt data and produces per-Pfam-ID datasets. The following goal was to enable a more flexible dataset through storing the information of particular fields without constructing the final text caption. By storing information in the JSON format, our downstream PyTorch trainers should be able to take as input lists of JSON objects, and construct the text caption on the fly, employing features like annotation dropout and field randomization.

We are now at the stage where we need to implement a Pfam Builder that can reproduce the style of the SH3 Legacy data, following the example of the SwissProt legacy builder (`recipes/build_swissprot_legacy_by_pfam.py`). Then, we want to generalize this to store the same `caption_fields` data as done in `recipes/build_swissprot_caption_fields_by_pfam.py`.

After this, we need to add a new parser (under `bioparsers/parsers`) that will consume general CSV data, such as the `databases/misc/SH3_supplement_data.csv` that holds the data associated to the SH3 Legacy Supplemental entries. Once we have that last parser, we should be able to write a recipe/Builder script that reproduces the complete Legacy SH3 dataset, and finally a generalized/improved version of this that takes all 3 data sources and stores caption_fields for each, appropriately.
